2/ZK-PROOF-OF-PERSONHOOD: codify audit v2 invariants (#96)
privacy-ethereum/zkID: specs/2-zk-proof-of-personhood/README.md

The protocol MUST output a deterministic nullifier to prevent duplicate verification.

The nullifier is derived from the card's RSA signature over a canonical signed message that binds the application identifier:

```
nullifier := Poseidon( RSA_Sign_sk(canonical_message(app_id)) )
```

Where:
- `RSA_Sign_sk` is the card's RSA signing operation using the user's private key `sk` (PKCS#1 v1.5, which is deterministic — same key + same message = same signature),
- `canonical_message(app_id)` is a deterministic, fixed-length byte sequence uniquely determined by `app_id` (see [Canonical Signed-Message Requirement](#canonical-signed-message-requirement)),
- `Poseidon` is the Poseidon hash function (see [Cryptographic Primitives](#cryptographic-primitives)).

> The nullifier is computed in the DeviceSig circuit, not the CertChain circuit (see [Circuit Design](#circuit-design)).

Reviewer: Rename to match Circuit B's current name in the reference impl ([`userSig.circom`](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/circuits/userSig.circom)):

```suggestion
The nullifier is computed in the UserSig circuit, not the CertChain circuit (see [Circuit Design](#circuit-design)).
```

   sn := ExtractSerialNumber(user_cert)
   ```

   `sn` MUST be bound to the canonical X.509 serial-number position within the user certificate's TBS. Implementations MUST NOT accept prover-supplied offsets into the TBS as the binding mechanism unless those offsets are structurally derived from constant DER markers in-circuit — specifically, the outer SEQUENCE header and the optional `[0] EXPLICIT` version block.

   Local tag/length checks (e.g., `tbs[offset-2] == 0x02 && 0 < tbs[offset-1] <= 20`) are insufficient: a typical X.509 TBS contains multiple ASN.1 INTEGER positions (version, modulus, exponent, extension contents) that satisfy such checks. A malicious prover could redirect the offset to any of them and obtain a non-canonical "serial number" that is provably not in the revocation tree, bypassing revocation. See [DER-Offset Structural Binding](#der-offset-structural-binding).

>    Implementations supporting only v3 issuer TBSes (the typical MOICA case) SHOULD pin the version block bytes (`[0xa0, 0x03, 0x02, 0x01, 0x02]` at TBS offsets `[4..8]`) as constants. Implementations supporting other X.509 versions MUST document the supported version set and the corresponding canonical serial-number offsets.

Reviewer: The reference zkmopro/zkID implementation currently falls between the two cases this paragraph distinguishes: it conditionally supports both v1 and v3 ([`certChain.circom#L84-L100`](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/circuits/certChain.circom#L84-L100)) but does not document the v1 fallback in [`SPEC.md`](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/SPEC.md). As written, the MUST clause is technically violated by the reference impl.

Lightest reconciliation — soften the MUST to a SHOULD and point to the audit-v3 INFO finding that flagged this:

```suggestion
   Implementations that restrict issuer TBSes to v3 (the typical MOICA case) SHOULD pin the version block bytes (`[0xa0, 0x03, 0x02, 0x01, 0x02]` at TBS offsets `[4..8]`) as constants. Implementations that accept additional X.509 versions SHOULD document the supported version set and the corresponding canonical serial-number offsets. The reference zkmopro/zkID implementation currently accepts both v1 and v3 issuer TBSes; see [`audit_report_v3.md` INFO finding](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v3.md).
```

Alternative if you'd rather keep the MUST as the right normative bar: land this PR as-is and fix downstream in zkmopro/zkID by hard-pinning `issuerTbs[4] === 0xa0` (strict v3) or documenting the v1 fallback in SPEC.md.

>    Implementations that restrict issuer TBSes to v3 (the typical MOICA case) SHOULD pin the version block bytes (`[0xa0, 0x03, 0x02, 0x01, 0x02]` at TBS offsets `[4..8]`) as constants. Implementations that accept additional X.509 versions SHOULD document the supported version set and the corresponding canonical serial-number offsets. The reference zkmopro/zkID implementation currently accepts both v1 and v3 issuer TBSes; see [`audit_report_v3.md` INFO finding](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v3.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Implementations that restrict issuer TBSes to v3 (the typical MOICA case) SHOULD pin the version block bytes (`[0xa0, 0x03, 0x02, 0x01, 0x02]` at TBS offsets `[4..8]`) as constants. Implementations that accept additional X.509 versions SHOULD document the supported version set and the corresponding canonical serial-number offsets. The reference privacy-ethereum/zkID implementation currently accepts both v1 and v3 issuer TBSes; see [`audit_report_v3.md` INFO finding](https://github.com/privacy-ethereum/zkID/blob/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v3.md).
```
Noted that it will be changed in the future

The mitigation is purely a circuit-level invariant: pin the signed-message length and constrain every byte. The protocol MUST NOT rely on prover-side honest behavior to avoid this malleability.

## Format-Uniqueness Assumptions

Implementations that rely on byte-pattern uniqueness within issuer-signed payloads (e.g., the canonical 5-byte DER prefix `[0x02, 0x82, 0x01, 0x01, 0x00]` for an unsigned 2048-bit RSA modulus INTEGER) MUST verify empirically that the issuer's cert-issuance template guarantees uniqueness within `actualIssuerTbsLength`, and MUST re-verify after any change to the issuer's cert template.

> If a future cert-template change introduces a duplicate occurrence of a pinned pattern, the prover-supplied offset to the corresponding field becomes ambiguous — the circuit will silently accept the wrong field, with consequences analogous to those in [DER-Offset Structural Binding](#der-offset-structural-binding). Implementations SHOULD include a regression test that scans a representative production TBS for occurrences of each pinned pattern and fails if the count exceeds the expected value.

Reviewer: The reference zkmopro/zkID implementation has empirical verification only at audit time ([`audit_report_v3.md`](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v3.md) v3 Finding 1) — no automated regression test exists in [`tests/circuits/`](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/tree/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/tests/circuits) today. Audit v3 "Areas for Further Investigation §6" already tracks this as a follow-up.

Suggested footnote so the SHOULD lands as an explicit follow-up rather than appearing retroactively required:

```suggestion
If a future cert-template change introduces a duplicate occurrence of a pinned pattern, the prover-supplied offset to the corresponding field becomes ambiguous — the circuit will silently accept the wrong field, with consequences analogous to those in [DER-Offset Structural Binding](#der-offset-structural-binding). Implementations SHOULD include a regression test that scans a representative production TBS for occurrences of each pinned pattern and fails if the count exceeds the expected value. (The reference zkmopro/zkID implementation currently relies on manual audit-time verification; an automated test is tracked as a follow-up — see [`audit_report_v3.md`](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v3.md) "Areas for Further Investigation §6".)
```

Alternative: add the follow-up to this PR's "Out of scope" list instead of the spec text.

> If a future cert-template change introduces a duplicate occurrence of a pinned pattern, the prover-supplied offset to the corresponding field becomes ambiguous — the circuit will silently accept the wrong field, with consequences analogous to those in [DER-Offset Structural Binding](#der-offset-structural-binding). Implementations SHOULD include a regression test that scans a representative production TBS for occurrences of each pinned pattern and fails if the count exceeds the expected value. (The reference zkmopro/zkID implementation currently relies on manual audit-time verification; an automated test is tracked as a follow-up — see [`audit_report_v3.md`](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v3.md) "Areas for Further Investigation §6".)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a future cert-template change introduces a duplicate occurrence of a pinned pattern, the prover-supplied offset to the corresponding field becomes ambiguous — the circuit will silently accept the wrong field, with consequences analogous to those in [DER-Offset Structural Binding](#der-offset-structural-binding). Implementations SHOULD include a regression test that scans a representative production TBS for occurrences of each pinned pattern and fails if the count exceeds the expected value. (The reference privacy-ethereum/zkID implementation currently relies on manual audit-time verification; an automated test is tracked as a follow-up — see [`audit_report_v3.md`](https://github.com/privacy-ethereum/zkID/blob/b4f151dd20339cbec9f3b89f40497b6aca6bca55/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v3.md) "Areas for Further Investigation §6".)
```
Noted here as well

- [MOICA Certificate Revocation List](https://moica.nat.gov.tw/del.html)
- [Client-side SMT proof generation for revocation privacy](https://github.com/zkmopro/ZK-based-Human-Verification/issues/16)
- [Exploring Spartan2 Proofs for On-Chain Verification](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/main/wallet-unit-poc/onchain-research.md)
- [Circuit Audit Report v2 (zkmopro/zkID)](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/main/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v2.md)

> - [Circuit Audit Report v3 — post-fix re-audit (zkmopro/zkID)](https://github.com/zkmopro/zkID/blob/main/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v3.md)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- [Circuit Audit Report v2 (privacy-ethereum/zkID)](https://github.com/privacy-ethereum/zkID/blob/main/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v2.md)
- [Circuit Audit Report v3 — post-fix re-audit (privacy-ethereum/zkID)](https://github.com/privacy-ethereum/zkID/blob/main/wallet-unit-poc/circom/audit_report_v3.md)
```
Noted here as well
